x divided separate apart differentiated
x long time long
x must invariably surely
x joined unite combine
What is long divided must unite
What is long united must divide
The empire, long divided must unite; long united, must divide.

x gun firearm
x rod pole
x
a gun barrel the barrel of a gun
x inside in within
x surface top face
inside in within interior
From within the barrel of a gun
From the barrel of a gun
x out emerge leave exit
emerges comes
x government governmental political regulation regulatory
x power authority entitlement right
regime
Political power grows out of the barrel of a gun.

x in general all every any
x are is be
Whatever are All of Every one of
x feathers fur hair
máo
x owner master host main
x seat
chairman
Chairman Mao
x 's
x point indicate aim
x plan scheme strategy
instructions directions
x x we
x all entirely
x begin beginning start initial
x end ending termination
from beginning to end consistently,
x no not without
x change going against contrary to
without going against without questioning
unswervingly without question
x
x x follow obey comply with
Whatever Chairman Mao's instructions are, Whatever instructions Chairman Mao gave,
we will always obey them. we will unswervingly follow them.

x care caring minding concerned with managing controlling administrating
Don't concern yourself with It doesn't matter No matter
x black dark
x cat
x white clear bright
black cat or white cat
black or white cat
whether the cat is black or white;
if a cat is black or white;
x find search finding searching
x arrive reach go to leave for
x old aged senior
x rodent
rat mouse
rats mice
x then
x is be
x good well
it's good as long as it catches mice.
if it catches mice it's a good cat.

—罗贯中, 1330-approx. 1400

Part of the opening sentence of Romance of the Three Kingdoms, one of China's great classical novels. Attributed to novelist 罗贯中 (Luo Guanzhong), though it's uncertain if he wrote it.

—毛泽东, 1893-1976

The PRC government generally views 毛泽东 (Mao Zedong) as a flawed but heroic revolutionary, the father of the country who established the People's Republic of China (PRC) in 1949 after years of civil war and began modernizing the country. Western governments generally views him as a dictator who killed millions with the Great Chinese Famine and Cultural Revolution.

—华国锋, 1921-2008

华国锋 (Hua Guofeng) was Mao's chosen successor after his other chosen successors failed. He was pushed out of power by Deng Xiaoping aroun the late 1970s. Known for his "Two Whatevers", of which this is one.

—邓小平, 1904-1997

邓小平 (Deng Xiaoping), the next major PRC leader after Mao, introduced markets to the PRC and opened it to foreign investment. Credited for the PRC's modern economic prosperity. Criticized in the West for the 1989 Tiananmen Square massacre. The proverb above refers to his market reforms being accepted into a previously anti-market system.